Add Wasmtime to Toolchain (#450)
wasmCloud/wasmCloud.com: docs/ecosystem/wasmtime/index.mdx

---
title: "Wasmtime"
date: 2024-06-03T00:00:00+00:00
icon: "ti-map" # themify icon pack : https://themify.me/themify-icons
description: "WebAssembly runtime"
type: "docs"
sidebar_position: 4
---

# Wasmtime

## Overview

> The wasmCloud host serves as a runtime environment and uses **Wasmtime** as the underlying WebAssembly (Wasm) runtime. The runtime implements the virtual instruction set architecture (ISA) targeted by Wasm binaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The wasmCloud host serves as a runtime environment and uses [**Wasmtime**](https://wasmtime.dev/) as the underlying WebAssembly (Wasm) runtime. The runtime implements the virtual instruction set architecture (ISA) targeted by Wasm binaries.
```

Wasmtime is an open source WebAssembly runtime [hosted by the Bytecode Alliance](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime) and designed for use either as part of a larger stack or as a standalone runtime, running across a variety of operating systems and architectures. Wasmtime supports the WebAssembly standard as well as the [WebAssembly System Interface (WASI)](/docs/reference/glossary#webassembly-system-interface-wasi) and the [Component Model](/docs/reference/glossary#the-component-model).

In wasmCloud, Wasmtime provides a flexible production-grade runtime designed for [defense-in-depth security](https://docs.wasmtime.dev/security.html#defense-in-depth).

![diagram of wasmCloud platform](../../../static/img/wasmtime-platform.png)

:::info[Compared to Kubernetes...]

> Wasmtime serves a similar role to a container runtime such as containerd on a Kubernetes node, but don't put too much weight on the analogy: components are not containers, and using a dedicated WebAssembly runtime facilitates component-specific patterns such as composition. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wasmtime serves a similar role to a container runtime such as containerd on a Kubernetes node, but don't put too much weight on the analogy: components are not containers, and using a dedicated WebAssembly runtime enables wider ecosystem reuse. 
```

:::

> ## Composition and the runtime

Reviewer: This feels like it should go later, or as some sort of "additional information" section. Composition isn't really wasmtime's responsibility, outside of it supporting the component model and being able to run a composed component.

To any runtime, a composed component just looks like a component, mostly.

WebAssembly components can be **composed**, meaning that they can be combined into a single component. Inside the encapsulating component, the constituent components link imports and exports, fulfilling one another's dependencies and otherwise communicating in order to execute the functionality of the greater application. 

> When you run a composed component on wasmCloud, the Wasmtime runtime in the host resolves the links between the encapsulated components. (This contrasts with **runtime linking** via wRPC, in which connections between components are mediated by the wRPC protocol and wasmCloud hosts.)

Reviewer: Hmnn I'm not sure this paragraph is true quite -- once components are fused together, AFAIK it's not that `wasmtime` does anything special to resolve at runtime -- it just executes as normal -- i.e. the binaries are merged, and refer to functionality from either original binary.

Author: Thanks for the clarification here!

![composed component running on wasmtime](../../../static/img/wasmtime-composed.png)
*Component foo and component bar were composed at build-time into a single component&mdash;when the composed component runs, Wasmtime resolves the links between components foo and bar.*

For more information, see [Linking Components](/docs/concepts/linking-components/) and [Linking at Build](/docs/concepts/linking-components/linking-at-build).

## Using Wasmtime for local development

> In some cases, developers may wish to test components against standalone Wasmtime. 

Reviewer: I think we could say something here about how components that run in wasmclould run in `wasmtime`, because we utilize (and stay compatible with) relevant standards, like `wasi-http`.

An example of running `wasmtime serve` here on one of our components would also be awesome -- though it's not quite so easy to get the `http-hello-world.wasm` IIRC without building it.

Author: I'd had a similar thought about a `wasmtime serve` example...I'm taking a pass at that with my next commit; I don't think having to build should be tooooo too much friction, and it's a really nice point to make in a hands-on way.
